Decorators call agenda and notes

Tuesday, July 10th, 2018, 17:00 UTC

Attendees:

	Daniel Ehrenberg

	Bradley Farias

	Justin Ridgewell

	Ben Newman

	Kevin Gibbons

	Dave Hermann

	Caridy Patino

	Nicolo Ribaudo

	Kevin Smith

Agenda & notes:

* Whether export should come before or after decorators in a class declaration ([Issue](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/109))
    * Ron to collect feedback from JS developers
    * Function.prototype.toString issue
        * Ben's analogous issue with tooling
    * Intuition about export being a modification of the binding
    * KG: Function.prototype.toString revision introduced the convention that toString includes the text from the first token to the last token. If we want decorators to be included in a class's toString (which I have no opinion on), if the decorators came before the export keyword, and the decorators were included in toString, then export would be included, which would be pretty weird. Seems like we should change one of the several things leading to this, either omitting decorators or put export before.
    * BN: I've found ways to work around it, but it seems salient: It's a nice property for an AST to have that, if a node has children that are related to it, then tools that manipulate the source code have an easier time if all of the children that are contained are between the first token and the last token. It can be awkward if a child node falls outside of its parent’s token range. This comes up harmlessly with comments, where they lead or trail a node--the comment text is lexically outside of the range of tokens. You can deal with it. In this case, it's more significant that there are other kinds of tokens intervening between the child and the parent node itself, namely export coming in between which doesn't relate to the AST node of the class declaration. Given the precedent of comments, this property already is not universally maintained, but it would be convenient for my tooling and probably for Babel to worry less about stray children that appear lexically outside of the parent. My other thought is, it's conceivable that one day we want decorators that attach to export declarations themselves and modify their behavior; this would preclude that possibility. In my mind, decorators bind more tightly than the export keyword.
    * DH: I don't think I'm sold on that. Particularly, for tool convenience, it's a little more work, but it's doable work, and I don't think we should sacrifice what the right thing is for a small amount of tool convenience over adding a couple cases to tools. It seems like a manageable amount of extra work. The future-proofing one is a stronger argument; my intuition says that decorator on the outside feels more declarative.
    * RB: From an AST perspective, if you look at TS decorators, TS's AST treats export as a modifier of the class. We don't have an export declaration that has odd corner cases--export declarations are used in a bunch of different ways. Since we treat it as a modifier (among other modifiers), our AST is relatively simple in that we have an array of decorators, then an array of modifiers, and then the class. We may have future keywords, such as abstract. If we mix around the ordering, we'll have to rework the AST. Looking at the ES grammar, it seems like grouping the export things together is more of a convenience than a semantic thing. For Function.prototype.toString, there's no guarantee of reliability, since a finisher can replace the class. I'd be OK with decorators not being included in Function.prototype.toString. If other modifiers are included, then we may want to include export, OTOH. You can't eval a method, so it doesn't seem so important to be able to eval the whole class. For me, decorators before export is more readable. I've been talking with some folks on the Angular team. There is lots of Angular code using decorators. This comes up a lot: [https://bigtsquery.firebaseapp.com/query?selector=ClassDeclaration:has(ExportKeyword):has(Decorator)](https://bigtsquery.firebaseapp.com/query?selector=ClassDeclaration:has(ExportKeyword):has(Decorator)) We don't get any concerns about its placement. I'd be interested to find out from Babel, if there's heavy usage. There's a consistent user base that's comfortable with this approach, with intuition
    * DH: The fact that the syntax is a pileup of tokens, so there's no clear intuition for nesting structure. Having to know that there's one specific token is different. There is even a future-proofing rationale. We can think of export as a modifier.
    * DE: Note that Jordan was very opposed to decorators before export for tree sort of reasons, and that Ron has pointed out how we could support decorators to export even if class decorators also come first. How should we close on this question?
    * BF: I have a bunch of concerns. Ron was talking about a TS-specific AST; Ben has a different AST, so it's not a very strong argument. When you're reading code, left to right, if we add any decorator to export, then it would be a little weird that we'd be mixing modifiers to the exports to the decorator. On the question of other modifiers like abstract, it seems like class decorators should be able to see if a class is abstract, so it makes sense for the decorators to come first. We also shouldn't privilege and standardize whatever TypeScript does.
    * RB: Note that the TS syntax comes from other programming languages. We should be able to use this information to make decisions.
    * DE: OK, how should we come to a conclusion here?
    * JR: Let's direct people to the GitHub issue
    * BF: People's examples now may be very based on TS, rather than on first principles
    * BN: I'm sold by RB's argument, if you're thinking about export being among many other things that modify a class. I understand we want to match precedent and normalize the order that things are in, but we don't have to guess if we're OK with trusting how programmers do it. This leads me to hope that there's no necessary reason that decorators have to come in a particular order.
        * [Comment reflecting this new position](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/109#issuecomment-403918718)
    * DE: Either, export comes before decorators and toString can include decorators, or 
    * DH: I'm fine with toString leaving these out.
* The details of the PrivateName interface ([Issue](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/68))
    * Should PrivateName be somehow frozen/a primitive/a new object with new functions
        * How does this relate to Realms/getOriginal
    * Is PrivateName needed at all, or might some future proposal eliminate the need
        * Dan doesn't see how that would work; maybe someone could explain
    * DE: (explained the issue)
    * CP: I'd like to be restrictive about this. We know that classes will change, so let's leave this for later and go to Stage 3 without it.
    * DE: Did you see my comment on the issue thread about it?
    * CP: I'd like to avoid things that will create breakage
    * DE: Do you think the constructor will create much breakage?
    * CP: Yes, I think that's the most likely case
    * JR: But there are many important use cases
    * CP: You can use WeakMap, etc. We can provide this feature later. I don't feel that this is a must-have; we solve it later
    * DE: Even if we don't have the PrivateName function, you can still build a device that will create a private name for you.
    * CP: We might make sugar in the future that removes this need; it's fine if you have the capability, but it would later be redundant
    * DE: It seems implausible to me that it would be redundant
    * CP: We need more time to think this over.
    * DE: How bad would it be if we eventually had two ways to do the same thing, given that this doesn't add any additional capabilities?
    * CP: That might not be the end of the world, but I'd just like to think this through more.
    * JR: I'd be fine with ending up having two different ways to do it. You can declare a function or call the Function constructor. Once there's the declaration, you might not want to use the other mechanism anymore, but it's fine to have both.
    * RB: We need a PrivateName object one way or the other as a key for the private class elements.
    * CP: Yes, we need that. My position is just about the constructor, not the object. What if we don't have it in Stage 3 in the next meeting? We can do this as a generalization process.
    * JR: I think some way to create a private name with the decorators proposal is something we need with decorators. Either we need declarative private names or we ship constructor private names. With that, I can't imagine a case where having a private name constructor is wasted. It's such a small thing to add, I can't imagine why we wouldn't do it since it's the easier path now.
    * DE: Maybe it wouldn't be the end of the world to delay the constructor, given that you can build the constructor in a library
    * RB: I'll follow up with some more ideas. But if we put it in a module, how would you use it from scripts?
    * DE: Let's separate the question from whether it's somewhere in the standard library from whether that's exposed from modules or properties of the global objects
    * DE: (explained proposal for own properties in private names)
    * JR: This solves Level 1 and Level 3 privacy. If we want to do syntactic private names, this would give us an equivalent level of privacy, so it's great.
    * (general agreement, though some will come back and review it)
* TC39 planning
    * Is this ready for Stage 3 in July?
        * If not, what should next steps be?
    * Meet again in a week? -- yes
    * Draft presentation: [https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1issTHgP5bf_FsbCSDfKAHjjoNnFa9nI0bEeCZtbh1oM/edit#slide=id.p](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1issTHgP5bf_FsbCSDfKAHjjoNnFa9nI0bEeCZtbh1oM/edit#slide=id.p)

To summarize: We'll follow up about the following topics on GitHub and meet again in a week, where we'll see if we can decide on the issues and figure out whether we want to propose decorators for Stage 3

* decorator/export ordering
* PrivateName reliability
* PrivateName constructor
