Decorators call agenda and notes
Tuesday, August 14, 2018, 17:00 UTC

Attendees:
* Justin Ridgewell (JRL) 
* Jordan Harband (JH) 
* Ron Buckton (RB) 
* Ryan Cavanaugh (RC) 
* Diego Ferreiro Val (DFV) 
* Igor Minar (IMR) 
* Brad Green (BG) 

Agenda & notes:
* Decorators in toString? 
    * RB: If you toString a static method, it doesn’t include static. I liken this to how export is not included. It’s just the grammar production that determines the toString. What does including decorators in the toString provide us? One is diagnostic functions, the other is re-evaling can sometimes work. 
    * RB: I’m a bit concerned with including decorators in toString. There is some value for daignostics, but it has same pros/cons in that it’s limited only in identifying the function. I don’t feel that either is very strong. 
    * DFV: We’re using toString for lazy evaluation which saves a few 100ms 
    * RB: When I say it’s brittle, I mean that the class result of the declaration is the same class as what you’ve decoratored. You can replace it. 
    * RB: A lot of cases we’ve done actually replace the constructor. 
    * DFV: Not including decorator will break reifing later. 
    * DH: Same lexical environment won’t always allow you to re-eval. The decorator could be non-pure, etc. 
    * RB: If we do include, why are we not including export? 
    * JH: It modifies the module, not the value. You can’t introspect the value to determine if it’s exported. 
    * RB: I opened an issue to explore decorating an export. But we could then make export a part of the descriptor of the class value. 
    * JH: I don’t know if that would ever be allowed, the entire module system is designed around static naming. 
    * RB: I agree. 
    * RB: Back to toString, it has value, but not a lot. If we do include, then including export makes just as much sense. 
    * DFV: If you have two modules, one exports a function foo. The other consumes, if you toString foo, you’re not stringifying the export. You’re just stringifying the function foo. 
    * RB: Other languages always include decorators before export 
    * IMR: Angular has experience using toString. Our experience is that isn’t been buggy, not good. You could preprocess the code to do this. I don’t quite get the argument about evaling because it’s already buggy. 
    * DFV: Agreed, but this is just about making it consistent. 
    * RB: Typescript has had not issues with decorators not included in toString 
    * IMR: It’s a bit harder for implementations to include. It also affects the shape of the toString. 
    * RB: MM said that static should come before decorators, too. 
    * JRL: Oh god no. 
    * JH: toString should include static. 
    * DFV: The thing you toString is the function. Not the place where the function is defined. 
    * RB: Export is modifier on the class. 
    * RC: that’s just the same as a visibility modifier 
    * BG: Angular has had a ton of users who’ve had no issues with this. 
    * RC: export changes the shape of the module? 
* Defensive Methods 
    * JH: I understand why we want to prevent leaks, but I don’t understand why we want to prevent communication channels. 
    * RB: functions extending null is weird. But disallowing monkey patching here. If I curry privname prototype get, it saves the this value. If I patch call, I can get the this from it. 
    * JH: If it extends null, I’ll never be accessing these values. I don’t understand why this is a concern though. I just want it to be difficult to leak it, and easy to defend against it. I see there’s a little bit of argument for extending null. Just feels weird. If this is what’s needed, ok. 
    * RB: We would need guidance about how to do this in secure manner. I don’t think having a null prototype is necessary. Side channels shouldn’t matter here, we really just need a secure way of saving primordials. 
* PrivateName Leakage 
    * Skipping, we won’t be able to get everyone to understand it in the remaining time. 
* Export/decorator ordering 
    * RB: I put together a gist. Typescript and babel have had implementation experience, but they have been able to use it fine. They understand it. All of these other languages have set precedent. 
    * JH:  
    * RB: There is also syntax that allows us to decorate the export even if we put decs before export. 
    * BG: We would have to provide a similar user experience in actual code. Typescript and Babel have this precedent. It’s very strong. 
    * JH: Decorating the export would require extra synax, because it’s dangerous. Being able to decorate a export will probably never happen. 
    * JH: Export can’t be modified by the decorator. It’s not the same as static or async. 
    * RB: You can’t modify the name of the export, but it gets its name after the export keyword. 
    * RB: Adding more modifiers later will cause weird ordering issues. Where does this `abstract` modifier go in the `export default @dec class X {}`? 
    * RC: Can decorator change the classHeritage? 
    * All: discussion.. 
    * RB: WH is concerned with decorating export. He didn’t really have a strong opinion on toString. 
    * DFV: I think most people like @dec export. Shu presesnted a his mental model with private fields. We could do the same to explain why we think this is the better decision. 
    * IMR: There are no clear rules with export @dec. 
    * JH: I disagree. I think it’ll be easy to explain. 
* Next Steps: 
    * To stop the bikeshedding, we could try deciding the toString without ordering. 
