Decorators call agenda and notes
Tuesday, August 21, 2018, 17:00 UTC

Attendees:
* Bradley Meck (BF) 
* Jordan Harband (JH) 
* Ron Buckton (RB) 
* Justin Ridgewell (JRL) 
* Diego Ferreiro Val (DFV) 

Agenda & notes:
* toString regardless of ordering 
    * BF: No strong objection to including. Would not want it if it’s not a simple substring of the sourceText 
    * RB: If it’s `@dec export`, either export is included or it’s excluded. Or we change what the grammar says is part of the toString. If export comes first, it’s a no brainer. 
    * BF: I object to concatting. 
    * RB: I agree. 
    * JH: RB wants to not include them? And BF wants to include, but only if we don’t concat. 
    * JRL: We could take it the other way, we could include export into exported class declarations. Then including export in `@dec export class X {}` isn’t a big deal. 
    * RB: Having decorators in toString allows for eval case, and allows contextual information. Those are the real reasons to include. Both of those apply to including export. 
    * BF: Does anyone feel that we need them in toString? 
    * JH: I feel like we need to include them. 
    * DFV: What decorators mean to a class and what export means to a class are very different. 
    * JH: We disagree because we think static and export are very different things. 
    * RB: Yes. And this comes from other languages that do this. 
    * JH: I don’t think we’ll make two independent decisions. We’ll either have decorators before export, and include export. Or we’ll have export then decorators, and we can include decorators in that case. 
    * BF: I would need convincing to do a concat. 
    * RB: The question that came up in the F12 debugger, can a debugger eval code that includes the export keyword? 
    * BF: It can happen. 
    * RB: but you said you inject export? 
    * BF: No, just don’t want to concat. I just want a regular, single substring. 
    * RB: My preferences are, don’t include. Then include the export in `@dec export`. Then concat if we can compromise. 
    * JRL: If we do `@dec export`, could we just include export in class declaration? 
    * JH: Export probably won’t go in toString. Concat probably won’t happen. My preference is `export @dec` and include decorators in toString. Or we do `@dec export` and decs aren’t included. 
    * JRL: Why the strong dislike for including export? 
    * JH: Because it’s not a value modifier. 
    * RB: I think the issue here is that export looks like a modifier. It should be modifying the class. 
    * … I took a break taking notes 😬 … Lots of “mental model” talk... 
    * JH: We can take the two options to committee: 
        1. Think of including export as a modifier 
            * Include export in toString 
            * Decorators before export 
        2. Think of export as a module thing 
            * Don’t include export in toString 
            * Export before decorator 
    * BF: That we can use export not on a declaration (` export { binding as name }`) means that it really can’t apply export as a modifier in every case. If we break the `export class X` into two statements, it would break the toString. 
    * JRL: Do these other languages that use export as a modifier, do they also allow you to break up the export into an export and a declaration. 
    * RB: I would have to see. 
    * JRL: We can also disallow decorators on export keyword. 
    * DFV and JH: That would force the hand of the ordering, because we would have to decide if toString is included in the broken class declaration. 
    * RB and BF: We could do a user survey, but you have to be careful of bias. 
    * RB: Typescript will conform to whatever ES decides. 
    * JRL: What if using decorators completely censored to toString? Kinda like `[native code]` 
    * JH: That would eliminate debuggability kind of like using `.bind`, but unlike bind, there are things that can’t be accomplished without decorators. 
    * RB: I don’t think there’s value in censoring instead of just not including them. 
    * JRL: We also haven’t discussed decorators on method’s toString. Are we basing that decision off of decorators on classes? 
    * RB and JH: Yes. 
    * JH: We’ll propose adding static keyword to toString in MF’s toString proposal. 
    * RB: Back to the survey, do we want to do that? 
    * JRL: I think we’d need to include others in the discussion to do a survey. 
    * BF: No opposition, but it’ll mean a long time. 
* Next Steps 
    * JRL: What are our next steps? 
    * RB: Need to discuss mental model approach? 
    * JRL: Is this a discussion that needs to happen in another meeting, or on GitHub? 
    * JH: I’m not sure we can convince the other in another meeting. We could propose including export in toString, and work from there? 
    * JH: Also getting static included in toString. 
    * JRL: Sounds like we can get the two mental model approach on GitHub, discuss all the changes necessary to support those models, and the pros/cons of them. 
    * RB: One thing we can discuss: Does it make sense to decorate exports to change its behavior? 
    * Next agenda will include decorating export. 
    
- - - -

* **Decorating Export discussion on Github**
  * https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/135
* **Two mental model approach on Github**
  * @ljharb @rbuckton, please create an issue.
