Decorators call agenda and notes

Tuesday, July 17, 2018, 17:00 UTC


Attendees:

	Daniel Ehrenberg

	Justin Ridgewell

	Caridy Patiño

	Jordan Harband

	Ron Buckton

	Domenic Denicola

	Waldemar Horwat

	Diego Ferreiro Val

Agenda & notes:

* Whether export should come before or after decorators in a class declaration ([Issue](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/109))
    * Function.prototype.toString()
* The details of the PrivateName interface ([Issue](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/68))
    * Should PrivateName be somehow frozen/a primitive/a new object with new functions
        * How does this relate to Realms/getOriginal
    * DD: From the perspective of consistency with the rest of the language, setting precedents, etc. PrivateName is creating a pseudo-defensible class thing which is sort of defensible in some ways. Usually, our pattern is classes. For defensibility, we have a pattern for that, run your code first, grab the functions, be careful. My sense was that the idea is, we want something that's a little more secure, even if it's not quite secure. It's strange if we're adding our first defensible class that we're adding, and we're doing it this way.
    * RB: This stems from some concerns that Bradley and I had about the design. Bradley has walked back his concerns, as frozen realms will be needed to make things totally reliable.
    * DD: OK, so why not do that here? Also, it's strange that these have internal slots.
    * JH: Module namespace objects?
    * DD: Those are different
    * JR: You wanted it to be a getter/setter pair?
    * DD: Dan explained how it needs to have the internal slot to act as a key.
    * JR: Should we separate out the key from the ways to access it?
    * DE: That's orthogonal; Ron has explained this in his issue
    * RB: Yes, this would work well as a follow-on
    * JR: It's more fundamental than that. Anything you do inside the decorator can leak the private state. You could be decorating a class, and if the elements have a private key, you have to defend against this.
    * RB: This is your buy-in for decorators
    * DD: If you have any encapsulated things, any time you have things that deal with it, you have to be very careful.
    * JR: Any decorator that has to deal with the elements array will have to defend against this.
    * JH: If I write any sort of decorator, then I have to trust it with 
    * WH: I have exactly the same concern, which is that I no longer understand the security implications of decorators with private state. 
    * DD/RB: (clarifies that you only get access to the private fields, via class decorators, if you can edit the class's source code)
    * DE: previous decision to allow class decorators access to private fields. Use cases:
        * Expose a private class "as a friend" en-masse
        * Observing mutations to any individual field, including private ones.
        * friend.js file in decorators repository---helps satisfy common feature request in private fields proposal to expose these things to tests.
    * JH: it might be interesting outside this meeting to write the "safe" wrapper so that you could do `@safeify(classDecorator) class X { }`.
        * RB: I wrote something similar. Also you could easily write one that doesn't pass elements at all, only allowing adding finishers.
        * JH: as long as that is possible my concern is addressed.
        * JH: in particular I only want to hide private fields, keep public fields.
        * (Some discussion about writing defensible code in the presence of Array.prototype modifications.)
    * WH: my overall concern: what invariants can I get
    * DD: the biggest invariant is if you don't edit your code to give people access to private state, it's safe.
    * DE: right now we try to make it a bit easier to write "safe" decorators that don't leak private state to malicious same-realm code. With things like null prototype, get/set own methods.
    * (Discussion of difference between private and defensible)
    * (Discussion of general defensible classes framework)
    * (Discussion of how we need to reify private names as PrivateName objects so that decorators have something to use)

* ToStringTag
    * TC39 plans
    * Ready for Stage 3?
        * Not yet
    * [https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1issTHgP5bf_FsbCSDfKAHjjoNnFa9nI0bEeCZtbh1oM/edit#slide=id.p](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1issTHgP5bf_FsbCSDfKAHjjoNnFa9nI0bEeCZtbh1oM/edit#slide=id.p) 
