Decorators call agenda and notes

Tuesday, July 31, 2018, 17:00 UTC

Attendees:

Justin Ridgewell

Caridy Patiño

Bradley Farias (BF)

Jordan Harband (JH)

Daniel Ehrenberg (DE)

Ben Newman (BN)

Kevin Smith (KS)

Agenda & notes:

* Summarize reception of TC39 presentation
    * Most of reception was about PrivateName integrity/scope and export/decorator ordering
    * No objections to decorators overall, and support for decorating private class elements
    * BF: They wanted side-by-side comparisons for other proposals, but I don’t think we need side-by-side comparisons anymore
    * CP: I think so as well. We’ve been able to bring options to the committee, choose something and move on. I think that giving options for every concern we have will be more and more noise, bringing concerns to the table. We should come next time with clear recommendations for what this group is deciding
    * DE: This matches my preference as well
* PrivateName interface integrity [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/pull/134](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/pull/134) 
    * Any thoughts on the new "defensive class" formulation?
    * BF: It's a little unclear why we should freeze the function, given that we aren't freezing the Function prototype.
    * JH: If the functions are shallowly frozen, they can’t be a communication channel. Making it just not config or not writable would be enough. You shouldn’t be able to change the prototype. No need to do anything else.
    * JH: I don’t understand why instances need to be frozen either. We just want pristine instances, after the construction as long as the proto is frozen, it’s fine.
    * DE: MM wants full integrity on everything if we use integrity
    * CP: Can we explore maybe restricting who has access to private name objects?
    * DE: That’s the next item.
    * BF: It seems like we are answering "why" this design is being researched. The design is more towards generic defensible classes, which might be better as a separate discussion.
    * DE: Seems MM needs to be included in this discussion.
    * JRL: Just seems weird to do
    * JH: Someone wanted to make an immutable array type, but they can’t do that even if they freeze it.
    * DE: We don’t allow construction. If we did allow subclassing, we could freeze only if `new.target === PrivateName`, not the subclass.
    * JH: If the only place to create a PrivateName is the engine, the engine could just freeze it.
    * DE: That’s what it does. It’s not built for subclassing yet.
    * JRL: It just seems weird. I understand how it can be used as a communication channel. But I don’t understand how it secures the PrivateName beyond that.
    * TODO(jridgewell): Write comment asking for full clarification on freezing function and instances
* Further PrivateName scope limitation? [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/133](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/133) 
    * For now, say only element decorators can access private names, and not class decorators?
    * Consider @jridgewell's proposal: Restricted private names by default, with separate function to loosen restriction.
    * Consider @allenwb's proposal: No decorating private names (?)
    * CP: There is only one use-case that I can think of where you really want to get access to PrivateNames that you haven't decorated. Normally, if you decorate the PrivateName, you're given the name, but in the case where you want to know all the PrivateNames in the class and want to use that. Yes, there are cases where you want that, but I believe we can compromise for now. We can say, you only get the privileged PrivateName methods if you're decorating that private field. Otherwise, you get a representation that you can't do much with. Would that be sufficient? I think we could compromise.
    * DE: I like that idea--I was also picturing that we might just filter out all the private names, but also making it a restricted name (as in Ron's proposal)
    * JH: We could use a hierarchy like in WeakRefs for less powerful and powerful subclass
    * DE: Or just an internal slot that makes it through
    * CP: And then maybe we don't have to bother freezing it.
    * JR/DE: these two things are orthogonal. They still have access to the prototype, to patch it. Using own properties is probably a no-go at this point.
    * CP: Ok. I remember now.
    * BF: Is there a problem not exposing limited privilege PrivateNames, and then exposing them later?
    * DE: Web compatibility risk, different behaviors would occur on the same source text
    * DE: This also gives us a roundabout way to get unprivileged field. (explaining…)
    * DE: I’ll write a patch that makes CP’s suggestion, and I’ll include the code needed to do this. It would mean that class decorators will get knowledge of PrivateNames (the brand), but won’t leak the read/write privilege.
    * BF: Yes, and I can explain. Even if we brand, we’re not supplying the read write. We can check the value of it to do the brand. MM seems to be interested in initialized brands only and not the value.
    * DE: Maybe they can super restricted without the ability to add it to another class?
    * CP: If I’m trying to decoraote a private field, I’m able to get the full privatename. So I can use it to install it to another class, because I was given access. If I create a decorator factory, that allows me to produce private names with full access. Everyone else that gets the class descriptor with low privilege private names for each private name. You can’t install those low privilege private name objects into another class. It’s more restricted, but could be a good first step.
    * JH: It’s not a problem that you can install the brand, as long as the value isn’t passed.
    * DE: I don’t think that’s possible, because you could just copy the init thunk with the descriptor.
    * JH: Is there a way to restrict the initializer with the PrivateName.
    * DE: This seems really complicated. I’ll try to write up a rather permissive patch to think through the implications. We can decide on it next week?
    * BF: Let’s include in that patch the init thunk that has an initialize thunk? (Huh?)
    * DE: Complicating brand checks too much seems really complicated.
* export/decorator ordering [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/pull/123](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/pull/123) 
    * Dan's proposal: Let's settle on export precedes decorator
    * BF: There were concerns with separating the contextual keywords (RB’s position)
    * JH: JRL gave me this "things that decorators can modify go after, things that can’t be modified go before"
    * BF: The killer thing for me is the decorating as a modifier, it doesn’t pan out when we look at other forms of export. Particularly `class foo {}` with `export { foo }`. The decorators belong with the class here, not the `export { foo }`. So export isn’t a modifier keyword to the class.
    * BN: I like export then decorators. WH seems to be in this camp too. We need to talk with RB about this. One thing we can say is that, yes, TypeScript already shipped an implementation with decorators before export, but TS can easily compile that down to the native JS ordering. It has that opportunity during compilation. Hopefully not a huge maintenance burden for TS.
    * DE: Typescript will be making two modes for these. RB’s argument is just that @dec export is the better option.
    * KS: I’m mostly listening to be aware of the choices. I don’t have strong opinions.
    * DE: Seems everyone here likes export then decorator. The poll I did seems  to have a lot of "I don’t like it, but won’t block it".
    * BF: I didn’t have super strong opinions until last week.
    * DE: 13 thumbs up, 12 confused, 1 thumbs down.
    * DE: I’m fine to go with the committee feeling, which is export @dec.
* @@toStringTag [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/131](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/131) 
    * We're good as is, including @@toStringTag?
    * DE: DD raised this, committee didn’t seem to be concerned. Not using @@toStringTag didn’t really make sense to me. We should be fine with this, even if they’re not class based.
* Function.p.toString
    * DE: Any have objections to decorators being in toString?
    * BF: I would prefer it to be included, but I don’t mind either.

Next steps:

* Land the export before decorators patch and follow up with Ron later
* Write a patch to make private names sent to class decorators less powerful
* Talk to MM about freezing functions
* Function.p.toString patch to include decorators
