Decorators call agenda and notes

Tuesday, January 15, 2019, 18:00 UTC

Attendees:

* Ron Buckton
* Nicolò Ribaudo
* Bradley Farias
* Kevin Smith
* Caridy Patino
* Daniel Ehrenberg

Agenda & Notes:

* Review ergonomics changes
    * Unbox property descriptor in decorator descriptor
    * Accessors are `kind: "accessor"`, not method
        * RB: What happens if you return a different kind from "accessor"
        * DE: TypeError
    * Methods use `method:`, not `value:`
    * Initializers are `kind: "hook", start() {`
    * Finishers are a separate element, `kind: "hook", finish() {` or `replace() {`
        * RB: are these replacements for class finishers
        * DE: this does replace stuff, you can have proto replace hook, lots of instance finisher desires.
        * RB: do all finisher hooks run before replace
        * DE: run interspersed. After looking at multiple intuitions from different naming, leave it up to the programmer to control ordering
        * RB: why are there 2 couldn't we converge on 1 and branch of return value
        * DE: JH had concerns, this design makes sense and lets us move forward
        * BF: can you have both
        * DE: no, TypeError since they subsume each other in intent
    * Rationale: These changes all make sense (and many resolve counterintuitive things I noticed when I was writing code samples, but brushed off), and as the proposal is at Stage 2, I want to be open to developer input for these sorts of superficial aspects.
    * Any concerns?
* Private interaction
    * Rebasing on top of brand-based private method phrasing
    * Private names can't be "reused"--each name can only be applied to at most one thing
        * DE: Examples of using names multiple times are heavily constructed. Potential optimization from only allowing 1 usage. PrivateNames include attributes about what they are.
        * RB: if you have PrivateName on a class, can I turn into a method or accessor
        * DE: you should be able to, but cannot share between classes. The decorator is consumed once a class using it is initialized.
        * RB: I want to be able to have a PN that can shared PrivateName on multiple instances.
        * DE: If you add same PN to multiple classes seems like a footgun. Part of rational is we don't want that. With primitives being provided they could leak the PN.
        * RB: metadata based reflection is main use case for my code.
        * DE: for now, can use WeakMap or public Symbol
        * BF: want to revisit this in light of adding private fields outside of classes. can we revisit this if we add enough errors
        * RB: that seems fine, but we need to review that we have enough errors that we properly safeguard anything we may propose afterward
    * Rationale: This should make private a little more predictable, and enable certain optimizations.
* Name enumeration order/freezing (minor):
    * DE: issue with @frozen decorator
    * Dan to champion anba's patch
* Strict mode class decorator issue [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/204](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/issues/204)
    * Proposed resolution: Early error for class decorators in sloppy mode code
        * DE: New proposal: adopt strict/sloppy of the surrounding context
    * Rationale: Avoids infinite lookahead, avoids inconsistency with extends, and this case should be somewhat unlikely anyway, since modules are catching on
* Elements issue
    * Dan's judgement: elements are in or out, no hiding private elements while providing public elements
        * DE: issues stem from combining elements and privacy. Some privacy issues lead to desire to only include public elements.
        * RB: could we mark private elements as "untouchable"
        * DE: problems with using private elements remain
        * CP: ok with not exposing elements at all
        * DE: problem resolutions only are include all elements or no elements (only allow extras)
        * RB: have discussed @trusted: . If you have decorator w/o trusted could you not get private elements
        * DE: @ID: syntax like decorator syntax reservation could be brought to committee.
        * RB: removing PN would remove some of my use cases. Ability to control JSON serialization. In order to serialize, access to private state is needed.
        * DE: SES has viewpoint of shallow view of classes. @JSONSerializable is a good counterpoint.
        * CP: don't need to expose PN. Similar to decorate computed fields of private props. Can still do this on decorator side still.
        * RB: alternatives like macros would have src text access including private fields. Sympathetic to concern that it is Too easy to have foreign decorator with access to private state.
        * DE: SES objections, what are next steps?
        * BF: go to SES meeting and ask if they can enforce a syntax requirement to use things
    * There are some use cases 
    * There has been some concern with privacy. Two mental models:
        * Pro elements: Decorators modify the thing they're decorating, and it makes sense that class decorators can see into and modify the whole class, and see private
        * Anti elements: Most decorators will only do shallow modifications
    * Not listed in an issue: Dan thinks decorators will be more optimizable without elements
    * Dan's proposed course of action: Strongly recommend to TC39 that elements be included, but excluding elements is a "backpocket" solution

* Decorator/export ordering issue
    * Dan's proposed course of action: Strongly recommend to TC39 that export comes before decorators
    * Rationale: Decorator syntax may be used for modifying other things in the future (possibly in ways other than imperatively, like class decorators); it makes sense to put them right adjacent to what they are modifying. We have a flexible grammar/program structure in JS, so it would be hard to generalize `@scope:` to target syntactic sub-elements. 
* Next steps for Stage 3:
    * Draw a conclusion on the above points
    * Send out to reviewers *this week* (otherwise not enough time to review)
